Joe Chow, Assistant Planning Director for the
City of Houston. This is the 12th of June, 1987.
Joe, would you please recount how you got into
planning, and then go from that point to where you
are now, and how this involves the City of Houston?
How I got into planning? I just happened to land a
job with the department. Well, I guess... How did
you go into... Why did you study planning? Okay, I
graduated from Texas A&M with a master's planning
program in 1972. I finished my degree in the summer
session and was looking for a job, and one of the
places that I applied for a job was the city of
Houston planning department, and at that time
they had happened to have a vacancy, and I started
as a planner, too, in charge of, or at least I was
right away assigned to downtown planning. And at
that time, they were doing some reports for
downtown, and I picked up on that. Identifying
the existing conditions, making projections of
the employment population, and
checking out the current development and things
like that. Really, it's more like a data book, so to
speak. It's what's going on rather than try to do a
downtown plan, so to speak. Roscoe Jones was the
director then. Roscoe Jones was the director.
That's correct.
I guess... Because of the nature of planning in
Houston at that time, our hands were tied to a
certain extent that we would do reports that would
spend more time on the current conditions and
pointing out possibly some of the problems that
exist.
To a certain extent, we recommended
identification solution, but not in the
recommendation form. Some action should be
taken, so to speak. That was during the fast growth
area of Houston. Well, the 72 is growing not as fast
as it was in the later part of the 70s and early part
of the 80s. Sort of the beginning of that, right?
The beginning, yeah. And so through that, I Also
did some parks planning,
area planning reports, such as the Galleria data
books, so to speak. We were very
careful as to not identify any publication of the
plans, so to speak, because we were under the
impression that anything identified as a plan
with the public
interest or opposition, so to speak, that we're
really trying to get something going. I'm not
saying that that posture is totally wrong, but to
me, it's probably the policy that's filtering
down from the mayor's office at that time. Who was
the mayor? First it was through Welsh, and then it
was Hawthorne, and then it was Jim McComb. Of
course, when Mayor Whitmire came in, she quickly
changed the planning director to Ethan Boise,
which was about a year. I think about a year after
she searched the country for the planning
director, And Roscoe was quite near retirement at
that time, wasn't he? Roscoe had 18 years in the
department. 18. As far as I know, about 18 or
something around there. Well, the policy, is it 20
years that you get retirement? You can get
retirement with 10 years and attain a certain age.
I see. Probably when Roscoe... leave the
department. He was not old enough to actually get
retirement benefit, but I think he's invested. So
when he attained his own age, he would probably
draw retirement for the 18 or so
years. That's interesting. But Whitmer wanted
her own man in as planning director. Well, I'm sure
everybody knows that Mayor Whitmire had
identified that she wants to run the city like a
business corporation. And she had her own idea and
policies of how the city should be run. And she
quickly moved to study how various departments
could be more efficient and that the whole system
of the city employees could be reorganized and
there was a commission appointed to do studies
about various departments how they work together
or how they haven't been working together and so on
and there was a report out to uh we organized the
city department into four or five major city
departments putting together some of them and the
first one that was put together was finance
administration, combining tax department and
some general services or some other departments.
I don't even know what the names were at that time
anymore. And then I think the second one is
probably the planning department. We took over
the economic development office of the mayor. We
took over, okay, when finance administration was
formed, the mayor's policy planning department
was absorbed by that particular department. Was
that the one that Rick Gerlach was in? Yes. And then
we later on took over community development.
It's a department with about 120 employees. Oh. At
the time when Roscoe left, we were about 55 to 60
employees. So we have taken on a whole lot more
responsibility and picked up a lot more
employees. As I remember, the chief activity of
the planning department under Roscoe was
subdivision processing. You're probably right.
However, we do have at that time, when I first
joined the department, there were four
divisions. Development, coordination,
handling plants, and development. And the major
system right away and stuff like that. And then we
have a group called research division, which
handles population estimates. and work with the
census and employment estimates and
projections. Economics. Yeah, and we don't have
that much on economics, so to speak, but
coordination with the Chamber of Commerce
Research Division.
We then also did some land use studies. That would
be Louis Welch, wouldn't it? Mayor Welch was still
with the city at the time, but... The Chamber of
Commerce historically has a very strong research
division, and they were very strong in working
with the census and population estimates and so on
and so forth. In fact, every year they used to put
out a data sheet that estimated the population for
the city and the county every year. plus
employment and so on. So they always have a very
good research division, so to speak. And we have a
small group of planners, two at a time, works with
them and so on. And then we have a comprehensive
planning division also. That division works on
items such as downtown reports and also small
areas planning reports. We did also pick up on
parks. We work with parks department and we did
some fairly good report. In fact, there were a lot
better reports came out before I got here than
after I did it. I don't know if that has anything to
do with me or not.
In about 1980 there was some work that was done here
that took an overall view of the greater Houston
area. Yes, we have been publishing a one-page map
with summary back up on the back page. The first one
we did was called 1990
map. We didn't want to call it a plan. I noticed.
Which identified the growth of Houston. I think it
was done during the early 70s or even late 60s.
Identifying how projected growth would take
place, identifying the major regional shopping
centers where they would fall on the intersection
of major freeways and thoroughfare and so on and so
forth. And the major transportation facilities.
And the major transportation facilities such as
freeways, which the information is available
from the highway department, so to speak.
documented it all into one piece of document. You
know that when Ralph Ellefrit was the planning
director, that the planning department did the
freeway planning. That's correct. That's what
turned to be the major trophies map, probably. And
then later on, it was taken over by the highway
people. Well, we still have the major trophy
mapping responsibility. It is now part of the
development ordinance. In fact, every time we
update the major thoroughfare map, we would have
to have council approval on it since 1977. Now
that, I would say that development ordinance
would probably be one of the major piece of work
that is done under the direction of Oscar Jones.
That much credit, I think, he deserves. Well, now
Joe, does that mean that the city council actually
makes the selection of corridors or freeways?
That means the staff will recommend the layout of
major streets, so to speak, at a mile distance grid
type of and identifying the need for
right-of-ways. Major streets but not freeways?
No. Freeways, I think we work with the highway
department to identify the location. That way for
areas that's not developed, we would have some
basis to to ensure that when they come in with a
plaque, we would request them for dedication of
the right-of-ways for major streets and so on. And
we adhere pretty much to it through the years. And
it has been, even before it became an ordinance, it
was pretty much followed by the developer and
required by the lending
Why not? Right. So that we could make sure that we
could get from one place to another in the future.
Sure. Yeah, well, that was quite a change, though,
from Ellifrit's administration to Jones, in the
sense that under Ellifrit, the planning
Department actually had responsibility for
selection of freeway corridors. Well, there
again is probably because of the growth of the
Highway Department, too. Oh, I think so. It just
happened all over the state. Responsibility just
becomes distributed to the District 12 here, and
also plus the creation of Houston-Galveston
Regional Transit Study Group out of the District
12. They would have specific responsibility to
identifying, analyzing, and determining the
major freeways between Metropolitan Houston and
Galveston area. So I wouldn't say that because we
didn't want to do it, but there is a distribution of
responsibility. It just evolved that way. Right,
it just evolved that way. And also as I was
describing the divisions, Mayor McCann did later
on created a neighborhood planning division,
which takes care of inner city area. Of course,
1974, we got into the community development and
start getting community development money. And
of course, the mayor created a CD office at the
mayor's office. But the basic area planning type
of function was given to the neighborhood
planning division of the planning department at
the time. So we did sort of divided the planning
function in areas. The CD area belonging to the
neighborhood planning group, while the rest of
the area belonging to the comprehensive planning
group, so to speak. And also the posture of the
comprehensive planning group is we would be also
responsible for the general planning of the area.
As a result, we would feel like that the 1990 map was
reasonably successful in identifying the growth
of the city, the growth of actually the metro area
which covers the ETJ outside the city limit. A lot
of the regional shopping centers did fall within
very close to the identified location. Now, if you
look at it from today, you might think that the 1990
map might have dictated the location, but I think
rather than dictating its influence in the
decision, off the developer to take a better look
at why the department had given that location as a
regional shopping center or whatever. Does the
department have any plans for doing that sort of
map again? We did in the mid-70s. worked that 1990
map into a year 2000, okay? And with that, at that
time, it was partly handing over to me as the
division chief. We feel like that maybe the
one-page map plus a limited explanation on the
back was not sufficient. We have gone through the
progression of coming back to look at things a
little bit more closely
so to speak and with the development of some parks
master plan and so on and so forth and some other
report that has not been published but being used
in-house we feel like that maybe we should develop
a report that may not be called comprehensive plan
but we'll have all the comprehensive planning
elements in the report as a result we did publish a
350-page report called Year 2000 Report. I'm not
sure if you have seen it, but copies were sent...
Copies were sent to the various planning
libraries and all the public libraries in
Houston. Now, this one happened to have a cover
that was not printed, but we did... make two prints
of that, I think each time 1,000 copies. And we have
distributed all of them at the cost of $10 a copy,
except to public agencies. And in fact, today I
have a request from an individual wanting to buy
one of these reports. That's why I have it out on my
desk. They want to read it. In fact, I was told that
TSU used it sort of a reference book for one of the
planning classes.
So in the Houston year 2000 map report, you're
stressing data rather than maps. Right. Why is
that? We feel like the map would be the one that
would come out as a composite map called Houston
year 2000 map. And the report is to, I think, to
really detail the map itself. Detail the map.
Right. And to provide, for example, population
numbers and projections and so on and so forth. I
think we do have a section on economy at that time.
And of course, since it's being produced at a time
when the growth was, like you said, very strong,
point out something that is not happening like
this because the economic downturn. But really,
there have not been that much projected into the
future, so to speak, even though we call it a year
2000 report. We did identify what may or should,
would happen in certain areas, but not
everything. Okay. Okay, following up on this is
that when Ephraim Garcia came to be the department
director. He brought with him an idea that he wants
to do planning in Houston, which sort of coincides
very strongly with my thinking of philosophy
about planning in Houston. We understand that we
will not have zoning but zoning is not planning.
People try to bring that together and confuse the
two things. We, I guess, as professionals, if we
can call ourselves that, that we need to identify
that zoning is not planning, that zoning is only
part of two to maybe accomplish a plan and so on. And
so we feel like that maybe we could do
comprehensive plan for this area here. And we do
feel like that the time has come because of the high
growth and all the confusion that is generated
through there. And also, I'm sure, the economic
turn down in Texas. Right. And the timing is
probably quite good at this time for us to do that.
So we started in Houston to work on a set of first we
wanted everybody to be comfortable with the idea
of doing climate. So Ephraim Garcia started
talking with a group of area associations. If you
know what area associations are, they are the
association joined together by developers and
landowners. For example, there is a city of Post
Oak Association, now it's called Uptown. There's
a very strong group called West Houston
Association. South Main Center, and so on and so
forth. At the time, there were about seven area
associations with strong financial backing from
developers and landowners. Each one of them
really have an executive director who is a
professional planner and understand what
planning is all about. And they worked very hard to
bring some of the ideas into the office and into the
area. For example, West Houston has been very
strong in the area of transportation, which they
feel like they need to have before they even go
develop the area. So they were very effective.
Jack Lindahl. Wasn't Jack Lindahl involved? Jack
Lindahl was... Lindahl. Yeah, Jack Lindahl
was... the first executive director for West
Houston, and then following that, what's his
name, now with Chamber of Commerce.
Where is Jack, though? Jack is now with Bernard
Johnson, Senior Vice President for Projects and
Planning.
So, just like Uptown Association, which is City of
Posto now, has John Breeding, who's a classmate
from Texas A&M. And then let's see who else. We do
have, okay, South Main Center has Marty Reiner,
who's got a Ph.D. in planning, I believe. So we have
very strong backgrounds going into these area
associations. Ifram saw the opportunity to sort
of piggyback on their experience and expertise.
We started talking with the area associations,
asking them to see if they want to do some
comprehensive plans for the areas that they are
responsible for. We have gotten good response
from them. Five out of seven area associations
have signed a memorandum of understanding to work
with us. Do you provide them with any kind of
guidelines? We do. We provide them with
guidelines. In fact, we even provided them with an
outline of the report that we want to see from them.
Could I get a copy of that? Yes, I'm sure somewhere
around here we have. Good. The evolution is such.
When we first talk with them, we want them to do the
report. We want them to identify the boundary of
their study area. We want them to work with one of
our planners or coordinate, hopefully, between
the various area associations so that one area
association that identify as something to do may
not negate something that's happening another
area association. Of course, you know, this is
very similar to what Fort Worth started quite a few
years ago on their sector planning. It's very
possible. I'm not aware of how they go about
whether they ask the local group to do it or whether
the planning department does it. Well, the local
group does it and then it's coordinated with the
professional planning. Okay, that's probably
what we have in mind from the very beginning. So we
start to go out and sell these ideas to the local
residents, so to speak. And we have gotten the
attention of local AIA group, APA group, ACME,
everybody. In fact, when we gotten the signature
of the area associations, either the chairman or
president or executive director, each time it
generated quite a quite a bit of debate within that
area association. As a result,
it also generated a lot of debate within the
professional groups in Houston, and Ephraim and
myself have been to various meetings to explain to
them what we want to do and how we go about doing it.
The situation is such that there are a number major
developers that feel like that they do not
understand the process enough or they
misunderstood that as a forerunner of the
planning department wanting to put more control
over how development should be carried out and
maybe changing to zoning of the area, so to speak.
And that sort of really caused everybody to pay
attention to what we were doing. uh the chamber of
commerce came out at the very beginning as an
opposing to this whole process uh you from
advanced to various meeting with them finally we
have assured them that that's not what we want to do
we want to do comprehensive planning we want to
take a look at the present and project into the
future so that development may be a little bit more
how should i say it orderly so to speak and when the
growth and development does come back
economically worldwide we can also handle it
physically so to speak um and one other thing was
one thing i wanted to ask you uh joe um You know,
assuming that all of these neighborhood groups or
community groups get their plans together and
they're coordinated, presumably, by
professional planners from the staff, I've
always referred to that method or that style of
planning as cut-and-paste method. And it was
tried in Anchorage, Alaska, I think, first of all,
about 19... 56 or 57, and
I perceive some disadvantages to the method, and
I'm sure you do too, but these can be overcome, and I
suppose that you and Ephraim have discussed this,
and also I wanted to ask you Once all of these have
been put together and you do have, in fact, a bona
fide comprehensive plan, then how do you intend to
implement it? Okay. Things have changed since our
initial conception of how these cut-and-paste
plans were done. Because of the various
discussions with the professional group with the
developers, with the individuals who are
interested. We have evolved to a situation where
now the area association will be supporting the
planning department in doing a sector planning.
We will be dividing up the city and its ETJ into two
major portions. One portion is still the CD area.
The planning for that area we perceive as slightly
different from the rest of the area. For CD, we are
really going back into identifying the problem,
identifying the redevelopment opportunities,
so to speak. And for the rest of the area, we are
looking at how to cope with new development.
how to support the new development with the
infrastructure that's needed, with the
transportation system that's needed. So the CD
areas are really areas that you're essentially
recycling. Right. If you look at the map over
there, there's a big patch of yellow area, I would
say about 250 square miles that's CD-eligible
area, and we will be identifying that as a
neighborhood planning area. For the rest of the
area outside that and inside the ETJ, we will call
it the sector planning area. The sector planning
area will be...